A documentation guide (#16)
redbadger/crux: docs/src/guide/hello_world.md

## Side-effects and capabilities

I know we said we'd build a simple application, but we need to start by talking about side-effects a little. One of the key design choices in Crux is that the Core is free of side-effects (besides its internal state). Your application can never _perform_ anything that directly interacts with the environment around it - no network calls, no reading/writing files, and (somewhat obviously) not even updating the screen. Actually _doing_ all those things is the job of the Shell, the core can only _ask_ for them to be done.

This makes the core portable between platforms, and, importantly, really easy to test. It also separates the intent, the "functional" requirements, from the implementation of the side-effects and the "non-functional" requirements (NFRs). For example, your application knows it wants to store data in a SQL database, but it doesn't need to know or care whether that database is local or remote. That decision can even change as the application evolves. You can read a lot more about how side-effects work in Crux in the chapter on [capabilities](./capabilities.md).

> To _ask_ the Shell for side effects, we will need to describe the possible side-effects the Core will request. And to help us create these requests (generated by the `Effect` derive macro), we can use capabilities - reusable bits of functionality which give us a nice API for performing side-effects. We'll look at them in a lot more detail later.

Reviewer: Not sure how to fix but I think that "generated by the effect derive macro" bit probably won't be very clear to new users?  Maybe we just don't mention it in this paragraph and leave it for the more detailed bit later?

Author: Maybe we can quote that line of code in a parenthesis? Or skip it like you suggest.

In general, we should probably sit a few people down to read it, try to follow it and report every bit of poor clarity back.

Reviewer 2: agree. I had a go at explaining the macro a bit (it _is_ relevant here). LMK if that works for now

```rust
use serde::{Serialize, Deserialize};
use crux_core::render::Render;
use crux_macros::Effect;

#[derive(Effect, Default)]
struct Capabilities {

>     render: Render<Effect>

Reviewer: Capabilities are generic over the event type not the effect type, so this isn't right. Since there's no event type below does this need to be:

```suggestion
    render: Render<()>
```

Although I'm also moderately sure that won't compile with the way the effect macro works now 😢

Author: Hmmm, this whole guide is out of date now, isn't it. 😬 Completely missed it, need to go and fix that... I'd rather have no docs than wrong docs

}
```

> For now, we will need a single capability, `Render`, which is built into Crux and available from the `crux_core` crate. It simply tells the shell to update the screen using the latest information. That means the core also produces a single `Effect`, but it will soon be more than one, so we make Effect an enum to prepare for that. Effect also needs to be serializable, so it can be passed across the language boundary between Core and Shell.

Reviewer: Think this paragraph also needs updates now we're doing a derive.  Maybe something like:

```suggestion
For now, we will need a single capability, `Render`, which is built into Crux and available from the `crux_core` crate. It simply tells the shell to update the screen using the latest information. The core needs to produce an `Effect` enum, which we derive using `crux_macros::Effect`. Effect needs to be serializable, so it can be passed across the language boundary between Core and Shell, but the macro takes care of that.
```

With this short detour out of the way, we can finally create an app and start implementing some behavior.

## Creating an app

To start with, we need a `struct` to be the root of our app.

```rust

> use std::marker::PhantomData;
> 
> pub struct Hello<E, C> {
>     _marker: PhantomData<fn() -> (E, C)>
> };
> 
> impl Default for Hello {
>     fn default() -> Self {
>         Self {
>             _marker: MarkerData
>         }
>     }
> }

Reviewer: Pretty sure we can simplify this now:

```suggestion
#[derive(Default)]
pub struct Hello;
```

```

> The struct is generic over two types parameters, `E` (for effect) and `C` (for capabilities). This supports composability and reusability of Crux apps (you can read more about that in the chapter on [Composing apps](./composing.md)). These are type parameters corresponding to the types we defined in the previous section. We also need to implement `Default` so that Crux can construct the app for us.

Reviewer: Most of this could go in the bin

To turn it into an app, we need to implement the `App` trait from the `crux_core` crate. And we'll need a few dependencies to make it work as well.

```rust
use serde::Serialize;
use crux_core::{App, Capabilities, Command, render::Render};

> impl<E, C> App<E, C> for Hello where
>     E: Clone + Serialize,
>     C: Capabilities<Render<E>>
> {
>     type Event = ();
>     type Model = ();
>     type ViewModel = String;
> 
>     fn update(&self, _e: Event, _s: &mut Model, caps: &C) -> Vec<Command<Event>> {
>         let render: &Render<_> = caps.get();
> 
>         vec![render.render()]
>     }
> 
>     fn view(&self, model: &Model) -> ViewModel {
>         "Hello World".to_string()
>     }
> }

Reviewer: Lots no longer correct about this, but here's some of the bits:

```suggestion
impl App for Hello where
{
    type Event = ();
    type Model = ();
    type ViewModel = String;
    type Capabilities = Capabilities

    fn update(&self, _e: Event, _s: &mut Model, caps: &Capabilities) -> Vec<Command<Event>> {
        let render: &Render<_> = caps.get();

        vec![render.render()]
    }

    fn view(&self, model: &Model) -> ViewModel {
        "Hello World".to_string()
    }
}
```

```

There's a fair bit going on, so lets look at all of it one by one:

> Like the `Hello` struct, the `impl` is generic over `E`, the effect, and `C`, the capabilities. The effect type needs to support cloning and serialisation. The trait bound on `C` says that this app requires the capabilities provided to include the `Render` capability. This may seem quite awkward at first but will become important as a form of dependency injection when we start [composing](./composing.md) apps from reusable modules.

Reviewer: Binable (probably)

> The trait has three associated types. The `Event` type describes the possible actions this app can perform. For now its's a unit type. The `Model` describes the internal state of the app, also a unit type for now, as there is no state to hold. The `ViewModel` describes the user interface to display.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The trait has four associated types. The `Event` type describes the possible actions this app can perform. For now its's a unit type. The `Model` describes the internal state of the app, also a unit type for now, as there is no state to hold. The `ViewModel` describes the user interface to display.  The `Capabilities` type lets us control what capaiblities the core has access to.
```

All our `update` function does is ignore all its arguments and ask the Shell to render the screen.

Finally, the `view` function returns the representation of what we want the Shell to show on screen. To start with, it's a simple hello world.

That's a working hello world done, lets try it. For now we'll do it from tests. That's not really a limitation, in fact, this is the intended way for apps to be developed with Crux - from inside out, with unit tests, focusing on behavior first and presentation later.

```rust
#[cfg(test)]
mod tests {
    use crux_core::{Core, Command};
    use super::*;

    #[test]
    fn hello_says_hello_world() {
        let capabilities = Capabilities::default();
        let hello = Hello::default();
        let model = ();

        // Call 'update' and receive commands
        let commands = hello.update((), &mut model, &capabilities);

        let Command { effect: actual_effect, .. } = commands[0];
        let expected_effect = Effect::Render;

        // Check update asked us to `Render`
        assert_eq!(actual_effect, expected_effect);

        let actual_view = hello.view(&model);
        let expected_view = "Hello World".to_string();

>         assert_eq!(actual_view, expected_view);

Reviewer: Probably update this to use AppTester?

    }
}
```

It is a fairly underwhelming test, but it should pass (check with `cargo test`).

## Counting up and down

To make things more interesting, we'll add some behaviour. We'll teach the app to count up and down. First, we'll need a model, which represents the state. We could just use a number, but we'll use a struct instead, so that we can easily add more state later.

```rust
#[derive(Default)]
struct Model {
    count: isize,
}
```

We need `Default` implemented to define the initial state. For now we derive it, as our state is quite simple. We also update the app to use the model:

```rust

> impl<E, C> App<E, C> for Hello where
>     E: Clone + Serialize,
>     C: Capabilities<Render<E>>
> {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
impl App for Hello where {
```

// ...

    type Model = Model;

// ...

    fn view(&self, model: &Model) -> ViewModel {
        format!("Count is: {}", model.count)
    }
}
```

Great. All that's left is adding the behaviour. That's where `Event` comes in:

```rust
#[derive(Serialize, Deserialize)]
enum Event {
    Increment,
    Decrement,
    Reset,
}

> ```

Reviewer: Suspect we might need an empty event type at the very start of this so the `Effect` macro doesn't go mad

The event type covers all the possible events we can respond to. "Will that not get massive really quickly??" I hear you ask. Don't worry about that, there is [a way to make this scale](./composing.md). Let's carry on. We need to actually handle those messages.

```rust

> impl<E, C> App<E, C> for Hello where
>     E: Clone + Serialize,
>     C: Capabilities<Render<E>>
> {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
impl App for Hello where {
```
